So, first I'd like to acknowledge my colleagues,
Dr. Sue Bakken is my mentor and is the PI
of one of the major projects I'll be talking
about today.
And here you can also see our funding sources.
So today I'm going to talk about some of the
opportunities that technology creates for
engaging patients, things that would not be
really possible or as straightforward or easy
without technology, and I'm going to do that
in the form of two case studies, the first
talking about tailored visualization -- we're
talking about infographics and types of graphical
formats. And then I'm going to talk about
<inaudible> and that is an online maternity.
So first, WICER is the Washington Heights/Inwood
Informatics Infrastructure for Community-Centered
Comparative Effectiveness Research.
This was a large AHRQ-funded project, had
lots of moving parts, including a hypertension
file, focused on hypertension, and the purpose
of this project was really to understand and
enhance the health of the community. Here
we're talking about Washington Heights and
Inwood. This is the neighborhood where Columbia
University Medical Center is located. This
is the community we serve. It's where I live
as well, and it's largely a Dominican neighborhood.
So most of the people are Spanish-speaking,
and some also speak English. We sent community
health workers into the ambulatory care clinics,
into a community health center, and into people's
homes, and we surveyed about 5800 people.
Blood pressure-- research-quality blood pressures,
height, weight, waist circumference and a
whole slew of patient-reported outcomes, including
measures of mental health, nutrition, physical
activity, etcetera. And one of the really
great and innovative things about WICER was
the ability to then-- most of the people gave
the consent to have their survey data linked
to their clinical data at New York Presbyterian
Hospital, so that's a really rich data source
that's available, and also many of them agreed
to be contacted for future research. So we
now have this wonderful research cohort. Some
of them have given swabs for genomic studies,
et cetera.
We believe-- and this is really with Sue Bakken's
leadership-- we really believe that we have
an ethical obligation to return the data to
the participants and to the community that
supported this project, but it's not enough
to say, "Here's a 60-page report, enjoy."
You really do need to give people information
in a way that they can find usable and actionable.
So we also know from preliminary data that
levels of health literacy are quite varying
throughout the community but fairly low on
average, and I'm so glad that these wonderful
presenters have come before me and have already
done-- so I don't have to go into the backstory
about health literacy and the importance of
that towards comprehension. But also we've
seen that visualizations can support comprehension,
but a lot of the work has been done with risk
communication, so we saw those part-to-whole
relationships-- the likelihood of being affected
by breast cancer, for instance, out of a group
of people-- and unfortunately when we looked
at the types of data that we wanted to convey,
we really didn't see much in the literature
that would give us any guidance as to what
is the best way to present this information,
because most of it really was about risk communication,
and we were showing things like fruit servings
per week, one-time point, fairly straightforward
information. So we engaged in a whole visualization
development process, and here you see an overview.
The first part involved iterative development
of prototypes, then focus group testing. ENTICE
is almost done-- at least the modules that
we're building are almost done-- and that
is the system that automatically generates
and tailors the graphics, and comprehension
testing is coming soon.
So what we did was we put together the visualization
working group, and this included people from
nursing, biomedical informatics, medicine,
public health, and maybe, I don't know, 17,
19 people, something like that-- sort of a
loose membership. And we looked first at what
kinds of variables do we have. What is it
that we need to visualize? And we matched
those variables to some standard graphical
formats, the kinds of which you see today,
the kinds of things that are available off-the-shelf
in Excel, for instance. But we also added
our own innovative, novel formats, analogy-based
formats that you'll see in a few minutes.
We engaged in iterative prototyping until
we felt like we had a few options for each
type of data that we wanted to convey. In
the process of doing that, we realized that
we had-- our main goal was to promote comprehension,
and what we had to do was: What are the cognitive
tasks that somebody needs to complete in order
to understand this information? And we started
to group our infographics according to those
tasks.
So for instance, understanding what you said
about fruit servings per week; you just have
to identify a single value. But if you're
going to understand BMI, you have to identify
the value and then compare it to reference
ranges and then make some sort of judgment
about what that reference range means. So
it requires more tasks and the visualization
has to support more. So here's an example
of the development of one graphic. So here
on the left we have the initial prototype
that one of my colleagues, Michael Bales,
put together, and he brought it to our group
and collectively we-- based on our group's
feedback, we came up with this one in the
middle. For instance, we took off the month
and we made it cleaner, more open, etcetera.
And then after revision by the focus group
participants, after iteration with them, we
came up with the one on the right. And we
cannot use this graphic, and I'll tell you
why in a minute.
So, focus group testing. We conducted 21 groups,
over 100 participants. Most of the groups
were in Spanish. We gave our participants
a stack of cardstock with one graphic on each
piece of paper and everybody-- we assimilated
data so that everybody was looking at the
exact same graphic, and we asked people, "What
do you think we're trying to tell you?" And
the way we framed the exercise was, "If it's
not clear, that's our fault that we haven't
represented it well. So tell us what you think
we're trying to say. How do you interpret
this information? What do you like? What do
you not like?" We would have multiple versions,
the different prototypes for a particular
type of information. "Of these three, which
one do you like the best? How would you improve
it?" Et cetera.
And
here are our findings, in a nutshell, if you
want to refer back to them, but I'm actually
going to talk about them as I show you the
following slides. One thing that I thought
was really interesting was the information
that you gave us before about less is more,
and actually our participants told us over
and over again more is more. They found that--
they reminded us that just because someone
has lower health literacy does not mean they
have less desire for information. We just
need to find a way to present it in a way
that's going to be useful. So oftentimes,
when given the choice between different graphics,
they wanted the one that had more information.
I also know from the research that what people
prefer isn't necessarily what supports comprehension
the most, so that's why we are doing formal
comprehension testing. But the process of
the focus groups did help us to do a preliminary
comprehension check based on how people were
interpreting the graphics. So we feel confident
that although the graphics won't all perform
equally well when we do comprehension testing,
we do have some confidence that people are
getting where we're going with these.
So, here's an example of a low-information
graphic. Most people understood this without
any problem. It's employing a familiar analogy.
We're using these stoplight colors to indicate
the reference ranges. But people generally
tended not to prefer this because it really
does not have very much information.
Compare it to this graphic, this was our most
popular graphic. People really liked this.
It still uses the stoplight analogy with the
colors and the double number lines, but it
provides a lot more information with the reference
ranges. You can see, "Oh, my systolic is 142
but I'm only two points away from the next
category over, and maybe I can nudge that."
And it also provides important context. So
you have there the picture of where the blood--
"Oh, this is how the blood pressure is taken.
That's what they were doing. This is where
that number comes from," and some risks of
high blood pressure. I asked people, "Do you
want to see this information? What if your
blood pressure is normal?" They said, "No,
we still want to see it. This is really valuable."
And I had participants take these home. This
is not their blood pressure information, but
they had-- they said, "No, I'm going to put
this on my fridge," because they really valued
what they saw there.
Here's another example of a familiar analogy--
and actually, there's two analogies at play
here. One is the stoplight colors and the
other one is the concept of the battery. What
I took from this is that we need to employ
the images and iconography that people have
been trained to use, because, let me tell
you, you get trained really quick that you
need to pay attention to this icon, because
if you don't, your phone's going to die and
you're not going to be able to do what you
want to do. So this kind of image-- I had
a few of my eldest ladies who did not understand
this, but pretty much most people understood
it and liked it and found it very useful.
So that analogy was very easy to use and people
also liked that you could compare it to something
else. When we had graphics that had just one
piece of information-- for instance, just
one battery, just Maria by herself in the
center-- people found it actually kind of
confusing. They didn't know-- "What's the
story? What's happening here?" People would
invent stuff. And when you add a comparison,
it actually makes it easier for people to
make sense of the graphic and it makes it
easier for people to use and understand. So
that was another important takeaway.
Here's another example of a familiar analogy.
Again, there's nothing inherent about this
graphical convention that-- we're not born
knowing this, right? We've been trained by
Netflix, by Amazon, by restaurant ratings
and movie ratings. We know how to use this,
and I was reminded of the fact that that's
not universal by a couple of my most elderly
ladies. I had one of them tell me that the
other men were in better health because they
only had two bad stars and three good stars.
It had never occurred to me-- it would never
in a million years occur to me to interpret
that graphic in this way. So it just points
out the fact that we have been trained and
we do want to capitalize on the kinds of images
that people are used to using in their daily
lives.
So here's an example of icons that did not
work well. I had people who could tell me
that Maria was active. They could tell me
she was fast. But they could not tell me how
many days per week she exercised, which I
found kind of baffling. But the fact is that
this is a convention. The graphical convention
of using repeated icons to represent repeated
instances of a more general class of things
was one that I had to conclude was not very
familiar to this population. Maybe in Europe,
where you see a lot more iconography, people
would be comfortable with this, but in our
neighborhood this didn't really fly. I mean,
a lot of people understood it, but many people
did not, whereas this one, people are familiar
with this. They know how to use this. So we
tried all kinds of things with icons. We thought
icons would be great, and they just really,
really failed. And one of the things that
I noticed with this is that when people would
talk about this graphic, they would talk about
running, jogging, walking, but they would
never generalize to other forms of exercise--
swimming, soccer. And I would ask people,
"I want to represent exercise generally. Is
this a good example? Is this a good image?"
And they said yes, but they still would only
talk about running, walking, jogging, and
I said, "Can you think of anything else? Work
with me here." And nobody could come up with
anything better than this. So one of the things
that we found was we had a very, very difficult
time showing things at the right level of
abstraction. Exercise, fruits and vegetables
were the three main areas where we had problems
with this. It was just really, really difficult
because also people took things very literally.
We had another graphic just like this one
but with pairs of tennis shoes, and people
would say, "Oh, those are the shoes you have
to buy."
So here's another example of where we got
into literal interpretation. The original
version of this graphic had little apple icons,
and people would look at this and they would
say, "So many apples." <chuckles> "Apples
every day. Victor eats a lot of apples." And
so their feedback to me was that I should
show a group of fruits so that people would
understand that it's not just apples. So I
work on my little graphic, I make my little
icons. I'm trying to make it so that it's
still legible even though it's small on the
page, and I come back with this, and the people
who saw the apples and then who saw this said,
"Oh, this is much better. This is much better
because then you can see that it's not just
apples, it's a variety of fruits." But the
people who only saw this said, "Same fruits
every day?" And I had people very carefully
scrutinizing the image-- "Pineapple, grapes..."
People were really looking at the details
of the image. So this-- people were really
interpreting this very literally, and it was
a very important message that we have to be
very careful about what goes into that message.
I don't know if you remember the calendar.
Right? This is why we couldn't use the calendar,
because we only knew-- this is a CDC 30-day
measure, so out of the last 30 days, were
you sad, blue or depressed, for instance--
and we had a graphic that had five days on
the calendar, and people would say, "Oh yes,
it's that time of the month for Maria," or
"Oh yes, she was depressed from the first
Sunday through the first Thursday of the month."
And our data are not that specific, but people--
that's how they interpreted it, and that's
not what we're trying to say. So we're actually
going forward with a graphic that's not as
sexy, it's not as exciting, it's just little
blocks, it's a simple icon array, but people
understood it and they didn't attach additional
significance that we didn't intend.
So here are a few quotes that we got from
our focus group participants. As I said, some
people would take their entire stacks of graphics
home because they thought they were really
interesting and useful. I also have run four
pilot participants through the comprehension
study with graphics that I built by hand,
or that I tailored by hand, and I had one
who said this, that "It opens your mind so
that you can make changes to your own health,"
and I nearly started crying at my desk It
was like, "This is what we've been working
for for two years." So I think that we really
did see evidence of engagement and people
said they found it motivating. Even just the
process of being participants in the focus
group-- people really values that as educational
and engaging.
So this is the infrastructure-- rather, a
diagram for ENTICE. This is Electronic Tailored
Infographics for Community Engagement, Education
and Empowerment, and basically what this graphic
shows is that you have this blue box in the
middle that represents the web application
that is ENTICE, and it queries the survey
data for the metadata, the population data,
and the individual data that it needs to then
go to the graphical components library, pull
the different pieces that it needs to then
assemble the graphic. And then this gray box
on the right represents the security. So this
is what verifies the users' identity, only
gives them access to the things that they
should access and not somebody else's data,
and creates an audit trail.
So here we've got our overall health graphic
again, and I've annotated it so that you can
see that, for instance, the title and the
response options-- that's the metadata. Here
you have Victor's, his individual data, and
then the population-level data there.
So we're, any day now, going to start comprehension
testing. It's a randomized control trial in
which each group serves as the other group's
control, and I'll show you exactly how we're
going to do that. We are comparing visualizations
to text for comprehension, perceived ease
of comprehension, and motivation for some
of the items.
And here you can see an example, a sample
item. Maria is in Group A. She's going to
see the graphic for the depression symptoms
but the text for prolonged stress, whereas
Gloria, in Group B, she's going to see the
text for depression symptoms and the graphic
for prolonged stress. The way we can do this
is because each graphic has a buddy that's
either visually or conceptually very similar.
Sometimes they're exactly the same, but the
user is not going to know that. And everybody
gets the same items. I very carefully built
the items so that everyone gets the same items;
everybody's just going to have a different
answer key. So primarily we're going for just
comprehension, not verbatim comprehension.
And then we also have-- this is a new graphic.
Nobody's seen this-- no participants have
seen this yet, so who knows if it'll work?
Who knows if they'll understand it, but it's
modeled after the Risks of High Blood pressure
graphic, and we're asking, for the ones that
have a behavioral component, "Does this information
motivate you to take changes to how you manage
your health?" and then also, "Please rate
how difficult or easy this was to understand,"
and we're asking that for every single item,
but text and graphic. And I've actually had
to move this item first-- this is why you
do pilots-- because I had a participant who
said to me-- who, talking aloud, clearly does
not understand the graphic and doesn’t understand
the information, and then says it's very easy
on the how easy or difficult it is, and she
explained that, "Oh, she's quite sure that
she has no idea what it means." So I had to
move that first so that it's really, "How
are you interpreting the graphic?" and then
let's ask the content questions later. We'll
see if that helps.
So moving forward, I am going to-- I've just
been funded to work on this project with Hispanic
caregivers of dementia patients, and we're
going to be creating and adapting graphics
for them, where they can track their own health
and that of the person for whom they're caring.
But here we're going to get into different
types of visualizations. We're going to get
into tracking trends over time. So that's
going to be a whole different thing. Probably
going to get more into line graphs and that
kind of thing, because there's not-- maybe
some animation-- there's not a lot of different
ways of doing that that I've seen that are
better than that. But we also want to talk
about how this is applicable to Obama's precision
medicine initiative because there's a lot
of communication that then happens. What are
your genomic results? What does the evidence
say about what is going to work for you? How
do we track your signs and symptoms over time?
And I think there's a lot of applicability
for visualizations in that context.
So, changing focus a little bit, I'm going
to talk about the second case study, which
is-- this is the project that I'm originating
that I'm calling Maternity Information Access
Point, or "My App" in English, or "Mi App"
in Spanish-- and this-- I'm reminded of something
that a doula told me recently. She said that
she tells her patients, "You are your own
primary care provider," and this is the patients
who sometimes are not so-- they're kind of
reluctant to engage, and she says, "No, no,
no, you are your own primary care provider.
You're the one who makes these day-to-day
decisions about how you're going to feed yourself,
your hygiene, your activities," et cetera.
And so this is-- when we get into pregnancy,
you get into women have to make lots and lots
of decisions, lots of self-management decisions.
They're hoovering up information like crazy,
and they have to be preloaded with the knowledge,
but intrapartum is not the time for a decision
aid, generally. You usually don't have time
to-- maybe you have a few minutes, but you
don't have time to really research and think
about it and hem and haw. You really have
to preload women with all this information
so that when they need it, if they need it--
there's a lot of uncertainty-- they can access
it.
So my tech partner is called Maternity Neighborhood,
and they are-- they're really cool. They make
an electronic health record that is designed
with the needs of midwives and birth centers
in mind. It's specifically for maternity care,
and they have a new product called Care Guide
that is an online maternity education platform.
So the provider would give their client a
login and invite them to see a whole library
of curated, high-quality information. The
provider can also load up in their own information,
whatever documents they want to put up there,
and they can message securely around that
content. It can also be integrated with the
EHR so that the provider can say, "Oh, you've
got this glucose test coming up. Here's some
information. Please sign this e-consent,"
and the engagement gets documented right into
the EHR. So my concern is-- I'm interested
a lot in underserved populations and health
literacy-- are we meeting the needs of these
women? Are we meeting everybody's needs with
this kind of product?
So this is a qualitative study to look at
the acceptability and the feasibility of this
for Medicaid-enrolled women. So, just started
last Friday collecting data-- recruitment
is difficult-- but we are running four different
groups, English and Spanish, first-time moms
and experienced moms, and in the initial group
we're looking at barriers and facilitators
of Internet access, how women are using the
Internet for maternity care information, what
sources, Internet and other, they're using,
what are they preferring, how they get the
information, and what they think about this
idea of this platform, whether they think
they would use it, what they would like about
it or not, and then a field-testing period
of one month. They'll go home. We give them
a mobile hotspot so that they always have
as much data as they need, and we will be
messaging with them as though we're the provider.
We can't give them specific medical information
but we can support their education efforts.
And then in the course of their usage, the
system logs all of the user actions so later
on we can download those log files and see
what did they use, what did they look at,
when, how long, how much did they use it or
not, and then we'll bring them back a month
later and do standardized metrics of usability
and user satisfaction and talk about their
experiences-- what did they like, what did
they not like, what can we improve. So that's
happening now.
And so the future directions for that project
will really depend on what do we find, where
does it make sense to go next, but one possibility
is definitely to study the effect of this
kind of platform on clinical outcomes. Right
now it's just maternity. I think it has group
applicability to all kinds of other conditions.
Diabetes. You're newly diagnosed with diabetes,
you have a lot of information that you need
to learn and process over a long period of
time, and this is I think the kind of technology
tool that would be really useful to support
that. The other thing that I've been thinking
about is these log files. What if we could
analyze them in real-time, as people are using
them, so that we can use their usage patterns
to inform clinical care? What is that people
are-- what resources are they hitting again
and again? What are we not-- maybe we need
to spend more time on that in our clinical
encounters because-- what search terms are
people using? Maybe we should rewrite our
materials to match the search terms that people
are using because this is the language that
they're bringing to the table.
So. I just want to conclude by mentioning
again that technology is what makes some of
this large-scale tailoring possible. It certainly
eases dissemination when you have something
that's web-based, and it can really support
that client and clinician communication. Both
visualizations and the platform can do that.
And this question of the log files, we have
all these data streams that we should be and
can be harnessing to promote a learning health
system, and I think the log files, capturing
user actions on an educational system, is
a great example of a way that we can contribute
to the learning health system by harnessing
that data stream. So moving forward, the research
priorities that I think are important are
looking at what is the optimal format to visualize
different types of data. Because we've looked
at just a narrow slice, but there's a lot
out there that we might want to visualize
that hasn't been tested yet. So I think we
still need to do a lot of work in that regard,
find ways of saying other things, and also
really being cognizant of what is going to
work in your local environment, because your
mileage may vary. What worked in our setting
may not work in yours, and it's-- the thing
with icons in particular really drove home
that message, that you can't assume that your
idea is going to work where you are. So I
encourage you to ask people. Thank you.